Chapter 7
It was when curiosity about Gatsby was at
its highest that the lights in his house failed
to go on one Saturday night — and, as obscurely
as it had begun, his career as Trimalchio
was over. Only gradually did I become aware
that the automobiles which turned expectantly
into his drive stayed for just a minute and
then drove sulkily away. Wondering if he were
sick I went over to find out — an unfamiliar
butler with a villainous face squinted at
me suspiciously from the door.
“Is Mr. Gatsby sick?”
“Nope.” After a pause he added “sir”
in a dilatory, grudging way.
“I hadn’t seen him around, and I was rather
worried. Tell him Mr. Carraway came over.”
“Who?” he demanded rudely.
“Carraway.”
“Carraway. All right, I’ll tell him.”
Abruptly he slammed the door.
My Finn informed me that Gatsby had dismissed
every servant in his house a week ago and
replaced them with half a dozen others, who
never went into West Egg Village to be bribed
by the tradesmen, but ordered moderate supplies
over the telephone. The grocery boy reported
that the kitchen looked like a pigsty, and
the general opinion in the village was that
the new people weren’t servants at all.
Next day Gatsby called me on the phone.
“Going away?” I inquired.
“No, old sport.”
“I hear you fired all your servants.”
“I wanted somebody who wouldn’t gossip.
Daisy comes over quite often — in the afternoons.”
So the whole caravansary had fallen in like
a card house at the disapproval in her eyes.
“They’re some people Wolfsheim wanted
to do something for. They’re all brothers
and sisters. They used to run a small hotel.”
“I see.”
He was calling up at Daisy’s request — would
I come to lunch at her house to-morrow? Miss
Baker would be there. Half an hour later Daisy
herself telephoned and seemed relieved to
find that I was coming. Something was up.
And yet I couldn’t believe that they would
choose this occasion for a scene — especially
for the rather harrowing scene that Gatsby
had outlined in the garden.
The next day was broiling, almost the last,
certainly the warmest, of the summer. As my
train emerged from the tunnel into sunlight,
only the hot whistles of the National Biscuit
Company broke the simmering hush at noon.
The straw seats of the car hovered on the
edge of combustion; the woman next to me perspired
delicately for a while into her white shirtwaist,
and then, as her newspaper dampened under
her fingers, lapsed despairingly into deep
heat with a desolate cry. Her pocket-book
slapped to the floor.
“Oh, my!” she gasped.
I picked it up with a weary bend and handed
it back to her, holding it at arm’s length
and by the extreme tip of the corners to indicate
that I had no designs upon it — but every
one near by, including the woman, suspected
me just the same.
“Hot!” said the conductor to familiar
faces. “Some weather! hot! hot! hot! Is
it hot enough for you? Is it hot? Is it..
.?”
My commutation ticket came back to me with
a dark stain from his hand. That any one should
care in this heat whose flushed lips he kissed,
whose head made damp the pajama pocket over
his heart!
. . . Through the hall of the Buchanans’
house blew a faint wind, carrying the sound
of the telephone bell out to Gatsby and me
as we waited at the door.
“The master’s body!” roared the butler
into the mouthpiece. “I’m sorry, madame,
but we can’t furnish it — it’s far too
hot to touch this noon!”
What he really said was: “Yes . . . yes
. . . I’ll see.”
He set down the receiver and came toward us,
glistening slightly, to take our stiff straw
hats.
“Madame expects you in the salon!” he
cried, needlessly indicating the direction.
In this heat every extra gesture was an affront
to the common store of life.
The room, shadowed well with awnings, was
dark and cool. Daisy and Jordan lay upon an
enormous couch, like silver idols weighing
down their own white dresses against the singing
breeze of the fans.
“We can’t move,” they said together.
Jordan’s fingers, powdered white over their
tan, rested for a moment in mine.
“And Mr. Thomas Buchanan, the athlete?”
I inquired.
Simultaneously I heard his voice, gruff, muffled,
husky, at the hall telephone.
Gatsby stood in the centre of the crimson
carpet and gazed around with fascinated eyes.
Daisy watched him and laughed, her sweet,
exciting laugh; a tiny gust of powder rose
from her bosom into the air.
“The rumor is,” whispered Jordan, “that
that’s Tom’s girl on the telephone.”
We were silent. The voice in the hall rose
high with annoyance: “Very well, then, I
won’t sell you the car at all. . . . I’m
under no obligations to you at all . . . and
as for your bothering me about it at lunch
time, I won’t stand that at all!”
“Holding down the receiver,” said Daisy
cynically.
“No, he’s not,” I assured her. “It’s
a bona-fide deal. I happen to know about it.”
Tom flung open the door, blocked out its space
for a moment with his thick body, and hurried
into the room.
“Mr. Gatsby!” He put out his broad, flat
hand with well-concealed dislike. “I’m
glad to see you, sir. . . . Nick . . . .”
“Make us a cold drink,” cried Daisy.
As he left the room again she got up and went
over to Gatsby and pulled his face down, kissing
him on the mouth.
“You know I love you,” she murmured.
“You forget there’s a lady present,”
said Jordan.
Daisy looked around doubtfully.
“You kiss Nick too.”
“What a low, vulgar girl!”
“I don’t care!” cried Daisy, and began
to clog on the brick fireplace. Then she remembered
the heat and sat down guiltily on the couch
just as a freshly laundered nurse leading
a little girl came into the room.
“Bles-sed pre-cious,” she crooned, holding
out her arms. “Come to your own mother that
loves you.”
The child, relinquished by the nurse, rushed
across the room and rooted shyly into her
mother’s dress.
“The bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get
powder on your old yellowy hair? Stand up
now, and say — How-de-do.”
Gatsby and I in turn leaned down and took
the small, reluctant hand. Afterward he kept
looking at the child with surprise. I don’t
think he had ever really believed in its existence
before.
“I got dressed before luncheon,” said
the child, turning eagerly to Daisy.
“That’s because your mother wanted to
show you off.” Her face bent into the single
wrinkle of the small, white neck. “You dream,
you. You absolute little dream.”
“Yes,” admitted the child calmly. “Aunt
Jordan’s got on a white dress too.”
“How do you like mother’s friends?”
Daisy turned her around so that she faced
Gatsby. “Do you think they’re pretty?”
“Where’s Daddy?”
“She doesn’t look like her father,”
explained Daisy. “She looks like me. She’s
got my hair and shape of the face.”
Daisy sat back upon the couch. The nurse took
a step forward and held out her hand.
“Come, Pammy.”
“Good-by, sweetheart!”
With a reluctant backward glance the well-disciplined
child held to her nurse’s hand and was pulled
out the door, just as Tom came back, preceding
four gin rickeys that clicked full of ice.
Gatsby took up his drink.
“They certainly look cool,” he said, with
visible tension.
We drank in long, greedy swallows.
“I read somewhere that the sun’s getting
hotter every year,” said Tom genially. “It
seems that pretty soon the earth’s going
to fall into the sun — or wait a minute
— it’s just the opposite — the sun’s
getting colder every year.
“Come outside,” he suggested to Gatsby,
“I’d like you to have a look at the place.”
I went with them out to the veranda. On the
green Sound, stagnant in the heat, one small
sail crawled slowly toward the fresher sea.
Gatsby’s eyes followed it momentarily; he
raised his hand and pointed across the bay.
“I’m right across from you.”
“So you are.”
Our eyes lifted over the rose-beds and the
hot lawn and the weedy refuse of the dog-days
along-shore. Slowly the white wings of the
boat moved against the blue cool limit of
the sky. Ahead lay the scalloped ocean and
the abounding blessed isles.
“There’s sport for you,” said Tom, nodding.
“I’d like to be out there with him for
about an hour.”
We had luncheon in the dining-room, darkened
too against the heat, and drank down nervous
gayety with the cold ale.
“What’ll we do with ourselves this afternoon?”
cried Daisy, “and the day after that, and
the next thirty years?”
“Don’t be morbid,” Jordan said. “Life
starts all over again when it gets crisp in
the fall.”
“But it’s so hot,” insisted Daisy, on
the verge of tears, “and everything’s
so confused. Let’s all go to town!”
Her voice struggled on through the heat, beating
against it, molding its senselessness into
forms.
“I’ve heard of making a garage out of
a stable,” Tom was saying to Gatsby, “but
I’m the first man who ever made a stable
out of a garage.”
“Who wants to go to town?” demanded Daisy
insistently. Gatsby’s eyes floated toward
her. “Ah,” she cried, “you look so cool.”
Their eyes met, and they stared together at
each other, alone in space. With an effort
she glanced down at the table.
“You always look so cool,” she repeated.
She had told him that she loved him, and Tom
Buchanan saw. He was astounded. His mouth
opened a little, and he looked at Gatsby,
and then back at Daisy as if he had just recognized
her as some one he knew a long time ago.
“You resemble the advertisement of the man,”
she went on innocently. “You know the advertisement
of the man ——”
“All right,” broke in Tom quickly, “I’m
perfectly willing to go to town. Come on — we’re
all going to town.”
He got up, his eyes still flashing between
Gatsby and his wife. No one moved.
“Come on!” His temper cracked a little.
“What’s the matter, anyhow? If we’re
going to town, let’s start.”
His hand, trembling with his effort at self-control,
bore to his lips the last of his glass of
ale. Daisy’s voice got us to our feet and
out on to the blazing gravel drive.
“Are we just going to go?” she objected.
“Like this? Aren’t we going to let any
one smoke a cigarette first?”
“Everybody smoked all through lunch.”
“Oh, let’s have fun,” she begged him.
“It’s too hot to fuss.” He didn’t
answer.
“Have it your own way,” she said. “Come
on, Jordan.”
They went up-stairs to get ready while we
three men stood there shuffling the hot pebbles
with our feet. A silver curve of the moon
hovered already in the western sky. Gatsby
started to speak, changed his mind, but not
before Tom wheeled and faced him expectantly.
“Have you got your stables here?” asked
Gatsby with an effort.
“About a quarter of a mile down the road.”
“Oh.”
A pause.
“I don’t see the idea of going to town,”
broke out Tom savagely. “Women get these
notions in their heads ——”
“Shall we take anything to drink?” called
Daisy from an upper window.
“I’ll get some whiskey,” answered Tom.
He went inside.
Gatsby turned to me rigidly:
“I can’t say anything in his house, old
sport.”
“She’s got an indiscreet voice,” I remarked.
“It’s full of ——” I hesitated.
“Her voice is full of money,” he said
suddenly.
That was it. I’d never understood before.
It was full of money — that was the inexhaustible
charm that rose and fell in it, the jingle
of it, the cymbals’ song of it. . . . high
in a white palace the king’s daughter, the
golden girl. . . .
Tom came out of the house wrapping a quart
bottle in a towel, followed by Daisy and Jordan
wearing small tight hats of metallic cloth
and carrying light capes over their arms.
“Shall we all go in my car?” suggested
Gatsby. He felt the hot, green leather of
the seat. “I ought to have left it in the
shade.”
“Is it standard shift?” demanded Tom.
“Yes.”
“Well, you take my coupe and let me drive
your car to town.”
The suggestion was distasteful to Gatsby.
“I don’t think there’s much gas,”
he objected.
“Plenty of gas,” said Tom boisterously.
He looked at the gauge. “And if it runs
out I can stop at a drug-store. You can buy
anything at a drug-store nowadays.”
A pause followed this apparently pointless
remark. Daisy looked at Tom frowning, and
an indefinable expression, at once definitely
unfamiliar and vaguely recognizable, as if
I had only heard it described in words, passed
over Gatsby’s face.
“Come on, Daisy,” said Tom, pressing her
with his hand toward Gatsby’s car. “I’ll
take you in this circus wagon.”
He opened the door, but she moved out from
the circle of his arm.
“You take Nick and Jordan. We’ll follow
you in the coupe.”
She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat
with her hand. Jordan and Tom and I got into
the front seat of Gatsby’s car, Tom pushed
the unfamiliar gears tentatively, and we shot
off into the oppressive heat, leaving them
out of sight behind.
“Did you see that?” demanded Tom.
“See what?”
He looked at me keenly, realizing that Jordan
and I must have known all along.
“You think I’m pretty dumb, don’t you?”
he suggested. “Perhaps I am, but I have
a — almost a second sight, sometimes, that
tells me what to do. Maybe you don’t believe
that, but science ——”
He paused. The immediate contingency overtook
him, pulled him back from the edge of the
theoretical abyss.
“I’ve made a small investigation of this
fellow,” he continued. “I could have gone
deeper if I’d known ——”
“Do you mean you’ve been to a medium?”
inquired Jordan humorously.
“What?” Confused, he stared at us as we
laughed. “A medium?”
“About Gatsby.”
“About Gatsby! No, I haven’t. I said I’d
been making a small investigation of his past.”
“And you found he was an Oxford man,”
said Jordan helpfully.
“An Oxford man!” He was incredulous. “Like
hell he is! He wears a pink suit.”
“Nevertheless he’s an Oxford man.”
“Oxford, New Mexico,” snorted Tom contemptuously,
“or something like that.”
“Listen, Tom. If you’re such a snob, why
did you invite him to lunch?” demanded Jordan
crossly.
“Daisy invited him; she knew him before
we were married — God knows where!”
We were all irritable now with the fading
ale, and aware of it we drove for a while
in silence. Then as Doctor T. J. Eckleburg’s
faded eyes came into sight down the road,
I remembered Gatsby’s caution about gasoline.
“We’ve got enough to get us to town,”
said Tom.
“But there’s a garage right here,” objected
Jordan. “I don’t want to get stalled in
this baking heat.” Tom threw on both brakes
impatiently, and we slid to an abrupt dusty
stop under Wilson’s sign. After a moment
the proprietor emerged from the interior of
his establishment and gazed hollow-eyed at
the car.
“Let’s have some gas!” cried Tom roughly.
“What do you think we stopped for — to
admire the view?”
“I’m sick,” said Wilson without moving.
“Been sick all day.”
“What’s the matter?”
“I’m all run down.”
“Well, shall I help myself?” Tom demanded.
“You sounded well enough on the phone.”
With an effort Wilson left the shade and support
of the doorway and, breathing hard, unscrewed
the cap of the tank. In the sunlight his face
was green.
“I didn’t mean to interrupt your lunch,”
he said. “But I need money pretty bad, and
I was wondering what you were going to do
with your old car.”
“How do you like this one?” inquired Tom.
“I bought it last week.”
“It’s a nice yellow one,” said Wilson,
as he strained at the handle.
“Like to buy it?”
“Big chance,” Wilson smiled faintly. “No,
but I could make some money on the other.”
“What do you want money for, all of a sudden?”
“I’ve been here too long. I want to get
away. My wife and I want to go West.”
“Your wife does,” exclaimed Tom, startled.
“She’s been talking about it for ten years.”
He rested for a moment against the pump, shading
his eyes. “And now she’s going whether
she wants to or not. I’m going to get her
away.”
The coupe flashed by us with a flurry of dust
and the flash of a waving hand.
“What do I owe you?” demanded Tom harshly.
“I just got wised up to something funny
the last two days,” remarked Wilson. “That’s
why I want to get away. That’s why I been
bothering you about the car.”
“What do I owe you?”
“Dollar twenty.”
The relentless beating heat was beginning
to confuse me and I had a bad moment there
before I realized that so far his suspicions
hadn’t alighted on Tom. He had discovered
that Myrtle had some sort of life apart from
him in another world, and the shock had made
him physically sick. I stared at him and then
at Tom, who had made a parallel discovery
less than an hour before — and it occurred
to me that there was no difference between
men, in intelligence or race, so profound
as the difference between the sick and the
well. Wilson was so sick that he looked guilty,
unforgivably guilty — as if he had just
got some poor girl with child.
“I’ll let you have that car,” said Tom.
“I’ll send it over to-morrow afternoon.”
That locality was always vaguely disquieting,
even in the broad glare of afternoon, and
now I turned my head as though I had been
warned of something behind. Over the ashheaps
the giant eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg kept
their vigil, but I perceived, after a moment,
that other eyes were regarding us with peculiar
intensity from less than twenty feet away.
In one of the windows over the garage the
curtains had been moved aside a little, and
Myrtle Wilson was peering down at the car.
So engrossed was she that she had no consciousness
of being observed, and one emotion after another
crept into her face like objects into a slowly
developing picture. Her expression was curiously
familiar — it was an expression I had often
seen on women’s faces, but on Myrtle Wilson’s
face it seemed purposeless and inexplicable
until I realized that her eyes, wide with
jealous terror, were fixed not on Tom, but
on Jordan Baker, whom she took to be his wife.
There is no confusion like the confusion of
a simple mind, and as we drove away Tom was
feeling the hot whips of panic. His wife and
his mistress, until an hour ago secure and
inviolate, were slipping precipitately from
his control. Instinct made him step on the
accelerator with the double purpose of overtaking
Daisy and leaving Wilson behind, and we sped
along toward Astoria at fifty miles an hour,
until, among the spidery girders of the elevated,
we came in sight of the easy-going blue coupe.
“Those big movies around Fiftieth Street
are cool,” suggested Jordan. “I love New
York on summer afternoons when every one’s
away. There’s something very sensuous about
it — overripe, as if all sorts of funny
fruits were going to fall into your hands.”
The word “sensuous” had the effect of
further disquieting Tom, but before he could
invent a protest the coupe came to a stop,
and Daisy signaled us to draw up alongside.
“Where are we going?” she cried.
“How about the movies?”
“It’s so hot,” she complained. “You
go. We’ll ride around and meet you after.”
With an effort her wit rose faintly, “We’ll
meet you on some corner. I’ll be the man
smoking two cigarettes.”
“We can’t argue about it here,” Tom
said impatiently, as a truck gave out a cursing
whistle behind us. “You follow me to the
south side of Central Park, in front of the
Plaza.”
Several times he turned his head and looked
back for their car, and if the traffic delayed
them he slowed up until they came into sight.
I think he was afraid they would dart down
a side street and out of his life forever.
But they didn’t. And we all took the less
explicable step of engaging the parlor of
a suite in the Plaza Hotel.
The prolonged and tumultuous argument that
ended by herding us into that room eludes
me, though I have a sharp physical memory
that, in the course of it, my underwear kept
climbing like a damp snake around my legs
and intermittent beads of sweat raced cool
across my back. The notion originated with
Daisy’s suggestion that we hire five bath-rooms
and take cold baths, and then assumed more
tangible form as “a place to have a mint
julep.” Each of us said over and over that
it was a “crazy idea.”— we all talked
at once to a baffled clerk and thought, or
pretended to think, that we were being very
funny.. ..
The room was large and stifling, and, though
it was already four o’clock, opening the
windows admitted Only a gust of hot shrubbery
from the Park. Daisy went to the mirror and
stood with her back to us, fixing her hair.
“It’s a swell suite,” whispered Jordan
respectfully, and every one laughed.
“Open another window,” commanded Daisy,
without turning around.
“There aren’t any more.”
“Well, we’d better telephone for an axe
——”
“The thing to do is to forget about the
heat,” said Tom impatiently. “You make
it ten times worse by crabbing about it.”
He unrolled the bottle of whiskey from the
towel and put it on the table.
“Why not let her alone, old sport?” remarked
Gatsby. “You’re the one that wanted to
come to town.”
There was a moment of silence. The telephone
book slipped from its nail and splashed to
the floor, whereupon Jordan whispered, “Excuse
me.”— but this time no one laughed.
“I’ll pick it up,” I offered.
“I’ve got it.” Gatsby examined the parted
string, muttered “Hum!” in an interested
way, and tossed the book on a chair.
“That’s a great expression of yours, isn’t
it?” said Tom sharply.
“What is?”
“All this ‘old sport’ business. Where’d
you pick that up?”
“Now see here, Tom,” said Daisy, turning
around from the mirror, “if you’re going
to make personal remarks I won’t stay here
a minute. Call up and order some ice for the
mint julep.”
As Tom took up the receiver the compressed
heat exploded into sound and we were listening
to the portentous chords of Mendelssohn’s
Wedding March from the ballroom below.
“Imagine marrying anybody in this heat!”
cried Jordan dismally.
“Still — I was married in the middle of
June,” Daisy remembered, “Louisville in
June! Somebody fainted. Who was it fainted,
Tom?”
“Biloxi,” he answered shortly.
“A man named Biloxi. ‘blocks’ Biloxi,
and he made boxes — that’s a fact — and
he was from Biloxi, Tennessee.”
“They carried him into my house,” appended
Jordan, “because we lived just two doors
from the church. And he stayed three weeks,
until Daddy told him he had to get out. The
day after he left Daddy died.” After a moment
she added as if she might have sounded irreverent,
“There wasn’t any connection.”
“I used to know a Bill Biloxi from Memphis,”
I remarked.
“That was his cousin. I knew his whole family
history before he left. He gave me an aluminum
putter that I use to-day.”
The music had died down as the ceremony began
and now a long cheer floated in at the window,
followed by intermittent cries of “Yea-ea-ea!”
and finally by a burst of jazz as the dancing
began.
“We’re getting old,” said Daisy. “If
we were young we’d rise and dance.”
“Remember Biloxi,” Jordan warned her.
“Where’d you know him, Tom?”
“Biloxi?” He concentrated with an effort.
“I didn’t know him. He was a friend of
Daisy’s.”
“He was not,” she denied. “I’d never
seen him before. He came down in the private
car.”
“Well, he said he knew you. He said he was
raised in Louisville. Asa Bird brought him
around at the last minute and asked if we
had room for him.”
Jordan smiled.
“He was probably bumming his way home. He
told me he was president of your class at
Yale.”
Tom and I looked at each other blankly.
“Biloxi?”
“First place, we didn’t have any president
——”
Gatsby’s foot beat a short, restless tattoo
and Tom eyed him suddenly.
“By the way, Mr. Gatsby, I understand you’re
an Oxford man.”
“Not exactly.”
“Oh, yes, I understand you went to Oxford.”
“Yes — I went there.”
A pause. Then Tom’s voice, incredulous and
insulting: “You must have gone there about
the time Biloxi went to New Haven.”
Another pause. A waiter knocked and came in
with crushed mint and ice but, the silence
was unbroken by his “thank you” and the
soft closing of the door. This tremendous
detail was to be cleared up at last.
“I told you I went there,” said Gatsby.
“I heard you, but I’d like to know when.”
“It was in nineteen-nineteen, I only stayed
five months. That’s why I can’t really
call myself an Oxford man.”
Tom glanced around to see if we mirrored his
unbelief. But we were all looking at Gatsby.
“It was an opportunity they gave to some
of the officers after the Armistice,” he
continued. “We could go to any of the universities
in England or France.”
I wanted to get up and slap him on the back.
I had one of those renewals of complete faith
in him that I’d experienced before.
Daisy rose, smiling faintly, and went to the
table.
“Open the whiskey, Tom,” she ordered,
“and I’ll make you a mint julep. Then
you won’t seem so stupid to yourself. . . . Look
at the mint!”
“Wait a minute,” snapped Tom, “I want
to ask Mr. Gatsby one more question.”
“Go on,” Gatsby said politely.
“What kind of a row are you trying to cause
in my house anyhow?”
They were out in the open at last and Gatsby
was content.
“He isn’t causing a row.” Daisy looked
desperately from one to the other. “You’re
causing a row. Please have a little self-control.”
“Self-control!” Repeated Tom incredulously.
“I suppose the latest thing is to sit back
and let Mr. Nobody from Nowhere make love
to your wife. Well, if that’s the idea you
can count me out. . . . Nowadays people begin
by sneering at family life and family institutions,
and next they’ll throw everything overboard
and have intermarriage between black and white.”
Flushed with his impassioned gibberish, he
saw himself standing alone on the last barrier
of civilization.
“We’re all white here,” murmured Jordan.
“I know I’m not very popular. I don’t
give big parties. I suppose you’ve got to
make your house into a pigsty in order to
have any friends — in the modern world.”
Angry as I was, as we all were, I was tempted
to laugh whenever he opened his mouth. The
transition from libertine to prig was so complete.
“I’ve got something to tell you, old sport
——” began Gatsby. But Daisy guessed
at his intention.
“Please don’t!” she interrupted helplessly.
“Please let’s all go home. Why don’t
we all go home?”
“That’s a good idea.” I got up. “Come
on, Tom. Nobody wants a drink.”
“I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell
me.”
“Your wife doesn’t love you,” said Gatsby.
“She’s never loved you. She loves me.”
“You must be crazy!” exclaimed Tom automatically.
Gatsby sprang to his feet, vivid with excitement.
“She never loved you, do you hear?” he
cried. “She only married you because I was
poor and she was tired of waiting for me.
It was a terrible mistake, but in her heart
she never loved any one except me!”
At this point Jordan and I tried to go, but
Tom and Gatsby insisted with competitive firmness
that we remain — as though neither of them
had anything to conceal and it would be a
privilege to partake vicariously of their
emotions.
“Sit down, Daisy,” Tom’s voice groped
unsuccessfully for the paternal note. “What’s
been going on? I want to hear all about it.”
“I told you what’s been going on,” said
Gatsby. “Going on for five years — and
you didn’t know.”
Tom turned to Daisy sharply.
“You’ve been seeing this fellow for five
years?”
“Not seeing,” said Gatsby. “No, we couldn’t
meet. But both of us loved each other all
that time, old sport, and you didn’t know.
I used to laugh sometimes.”— but there
was no laughter in his eyes ——” to think
that you didn’t know.”
“Oh — that’s all.” Tom tapped his
thick fingers together like a clergyman and
leaned back in his chair.
“You’re crazy!” he exploded. “I can’t
speak about what happened five years ago,
because I didn’t know Daisy then — and
I’ll be damned if I see how you got within
a mile of her unless you brought the groceries
to the back door. But all the rest of that’s
a God damned lie. Daisy loved me when she
married me and she loves me now.”
“No,” said Gatsby, shaking his head.
“She does, though. The trouble is that sometimes
she gets foolish ideas in her head and doesn’t
know what she’s doing.” He nodded sagely.
“And what’s more, I love Daisy too. Once
in a while I go off on a spree and make a
fool of myself, but I always come back, and
in my heart I love her all the time.”
“You’re revolting,” said Daisy. She
turned to me, and her voice, dropping an octave
lower, filled the room with thrilling scorn:
“Do you know why we left Chicago? I’m
surprised that they didn’t treat you to
the story of that little spree.”
Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.
“Daisy, that’s all over now,” he said
earnestly. “It doesn’t matter any more.
Just tell him the truth — that you never
loved him — and it’s all wiped out forever.”
She looked at him blindly. “Why — how
could I love him — possibly?”
“You never loved him.”
She hesitated. Her eyes fell on Jordan and
me with a sort of appeal, as though she realized
at last what she was doing — and as though
she had never, all along, intended doing anything
at all. But it was done now. It was too late.
“I never loved him,” she said, with perceptible
reluctance.
“Not at Kapiolani?” demanded Tom suddenly.
“No.”
From the ballroom beneath, muffled and suffocating
chords were drifting up on hot waves of air.
“Not that day I carried you down from the
Punch Bowl to keep your shoes dry?” There
was a husky tenderness in his tone.. .. “Daisy?”
“Please don’t.” Her voice was cold,
but the rancor was gone from it. She looked
at Gatsby. “There, Jay,” she said — but
her hand as she tried to light a cigarette
was trembling. Suddenly she threw the cigarette
and the burning match on the carpet.
“Oh, you want too much!” she cried to
Gatsby. “I love you now — isn’t that
enough? I can’t help what’s past.” She
began to sob helplessly. “I did love him
once — but I loved you too.”
Gatsby’s eyes opened and closed.
“You loved me too?” he repeated.
“Even that’s a lie,” said Tom savagely.
“She didn’t know you were alive. Why — there’re
things between Daisy and me that you’ll
never know, things that neither of us can
ever forget.”
The words seemed to bite physically into Gatsby.
“I want to speak to Daisy alone,” he insisted.
“She’s all excited now ——”
“Even alone I can’t say I never loved
Tom,” she admitted in a pitiful voice. “It
wouldn’t be true.”
“Of course it wouldn’t,” agreed Tom.
She turned to her husband.
“As if it mattered to you,” she said.
“Of course it matters. I’m going to take
better care of you from now on.”
“You don’t understand,” said Gatsby,
with a touch of panic. “You’re not going
to take care of her any more.”
“I’m not?” Tom opened his eyes wide
and laughed. He could afford to control himself
now. “Why’s that?”
“Daisy’s leaving you.”
“Nonsense.”
“I am, though,” she said with a visible
effort.
“She’s not leaving me!” Tom’s words
suddenly leaned down over Gatsby. “Certainly
not for a common swindler who’d have to
steal the ring he put on her finger.”
“I won’t stand this!” cried Daisy. “Oh,
please let’s get out.”
“Who are you, anyhow?” broke out Tom.
“You’re one of that bunch that hangs around
with Meyer Wolfsheim — that much I happen
to know. I’ve made a little investigation
into your affairs — and I’ll carry it
further to-morrow.”
“You can suit yourself about that, old sport,”
said Gatsby steadily.
“I found out what your ‘drug-stores’
were.” He turned to us and spoke rapidly.
“He and this Wolfsheim bought up a lot of
side-street drug-stores here and in Chicago
and sold grain alcohol over the counter. That’s
one of his little stunts. I picked him for
a bootlegger the first time I saw him, and
I wasn’t far wrong.”
“What about it?” said Gatsby politely.
“I guess your friend Walter Chase wasn’t
too proud to come in on it.”
“And you left him in the lurch, didn’t
you? You let him go to jail for a month over
in New Jersey. God! You ought to hear Walter
on the subject of you.”
“He came to us dead broke. He was very glad
to pick up some money, old sport.”
“Don’t you call me ‘old sport’!”
cried Tom. Gatsby said nothing. “Walter
could have you up on the betting laws too,
but Wolfsheim scared him into shutting his
mouth.”
That unfamiliar yet recognizable look was
back again in Gatsby’s face.
“That drug-store business was just small
change,” continued Tom slowly, “but you’ve
got something on now that Walter’s afraid
to tell me about.”
I glanced at Daisy, who was staring terrified
between Gatsby and her husband, and at Jordan,
who had begun to balance an invisible but
absorbing object on the tip of her chin. Then
I turned back to Gatsby — and was startled
at his expression. He looked — and this
is said in all contempt for the babbled slander
of his garden — as if he had “killed a
man.” For a moment the set of his face could
be described in just that fantastic way.
It passed, and he began to talk excitedly
to Daisy, denying everything, defending his
name against accusations that had not been
made. But with every word she was drawing
further and further into herself, so he gave
that up, and only the dead dream fought on
as the afternoon slipped away, trying to touch
what was no longer tangible, struggling unhappily,
undespairingly, toward that lost voice across
the room.
The voice begged again to go.
“please, Tom! I can’t stand this any more.”
Her frightened eyes told that whatever intentions,
whatever courage, she had had, were definitely
gone.
“You two start on home, Daisy,” said Tom.
“In Mr. Gatsby’s car.”
She looked at Tom, alarmed now, but he insisted
with magnanimous scorn.
“Go on. He won’t annoy you. I think he
realizes that his presumptuous little flirtation
is over.”
They were gone, without a word, snapped out,
made accidental, isolated, like ghosts, even
from our pity.
After a moment Tom got up and began wrapping
the unopened bottle of whiskey in the towel.
“Want any of this stuff? Jordan? . . . Nick?”
I didn’t answer.
“Nick?” He asked again.
“What?”
“Want any?”
“No . . . I just remembered that to-day’s
my birthday.”
I was thirty. Before me stretched the portentous,
menacing road of a new decade.
It was seven o’clock when we got into the
coupe with him and started for Long Island.
Tom talked incessantly, exulting and laughing,
but his voice was as remote from Jordan and
me as the foreign clamor on the sidewalk or
the tumult of the elevated overhead. Human
sympathy has its limits, and we were content
to let all their tragic arguments fade with
the city lights behind. Thirty — the promise
of a decade of loneliness, a thinning list
of single men to know, a thinning brief-case
of enthusiasm, thinning hair. But there was
Jordan beside me, who, unlike Daisy, was too
wise ever to carry well-forgotten dreams from
age to age. As we passed over the dark bridge
her wan face fell lazily against my coat’s
shoulder and the formidable stroke of thirty
died away with the reassuring pressure of
her hand.
So we drove on toward death through the cooling
twilight.
The young Greek, Michaelis, who ran the coffee
joint beside the ashheaps was the principal
witness at the inquest. He had slept through
the heat until after five, when he strolled
over to the garage, and found George Wilson
sick in his office — really sick, pale as
his own pale hair and shaking all over. Michaelis
advised him to go to bed, but Wilson refused,
saying that he’d miss a lot of business
if he did. While his neighbor was trying to
persuade him a violent racket broke out overhead.
“I’ve got my wife locked in up there,”
explained Wilson calmly. “She’s going
to stay there till the day after to-morrow,
and then we’re going to move away.”
Michaelis was astonished; they had been neighbors
for four years, and Wilson had never seemed
faintly capable of such a statement. Generally
he was one of these worn-out men: when he
wasn’t working, he sat on a chair in the
doorway and stared at the people and the cars
that passed along the road. When any one spoke
to him he invariably laughed in an agreeable,
colorless way. He was his wife’s man and
not his own.
So naturally Michaelis tried to find out what
had happened, but Wilson wouldn’t say a
word — instead he began to throw curious,
suspicious glances at his visitor and ask
him what he’d been doing at certain times
on certain days. Just as the latter was getting
uneasy, some workmen came past the door bound
for his restaurant, and Michaelis took the
opportunity to get away, intending to come
back later. But he didn’t. He supposed he
forgot to, that’s all. When he came outside
again, a little after seven, he was reminded
of the conversation because he heard Mrs.
Wilson’s voice, loud and scolding, down-stairs
in the garage.
“Beat me!” he heard her cry. “Throw
me down and beat me, you dirty little coward!”
A moment later she rushed out into the dusk,
waving her hands and shouting — before he
could move from his door the business was
over.
The “death car,” as the newspapers called
it, didn’t stop; it came out of the gathering
darkness, wavered tragically for a moment,
and then disappeared around the next bend.
Michaelis wasn’t even sure of its color
— he told the first policeman that it was
light green. The other car, the one going
toward New York, came to rest a hundred yards
beyond, and its driver hurried back to where
Myrtle Wilson, her life violently extinguished,
knelt in the road and mingled her thick dark
blood with the dust.
Michaelis and this man reached her first,
but when they had torn open her shirtwaist,
still damp with perspiration, they saw that
her left breast was swinging loose like a
flap, and there was no need to listen for
the heart beneath. The mouth was wide open
and ripped at the corners, as though she had
choked a little in giving up the tremendous
vitality she had stored so long.
We saw the three or four automobiles and the
crowd when we were still some distance away.
“Wreck!” said Tom. “That’s good. Wilson’ll
have a little business at last.”
He slowed down, but still without any intention
of stopping, until, as we came nearer, the
hushed, intent faces of the people at the
garage door made him automatically put on
the brakes.
“We’ll take a look,” he said doubtfully,
“just a look.”
I became aware now of a hollow, wailing sound
which issued incessantly from the garage,
a sound which as we got out of the coupe and
walked toward the door resolved itself into
the words “Oh, my God!” uttered over and
over in a gasping moan.
“There’s some bad trouble here,” said
Tom excitedly.
He reached up on tiptoes and peered over a
circle of heads into the garage, which was
lit only by a yellow light in a swinging wire
basket overhead. Then he made a harsh sound
in his throat, and with a violent thrusting
movement of his powerful arms pushed his way
through.
The circle closed up again with a running
murmur of expostulation; it was a minute before
I could see anything at all. Then new arrivals
deranged the line, and Jordan and I were pushed
suddenly inside.
Myrtle Wilson’s body, wrapped in a blanket,
and then in another blanket, as though she
suffered from a chill in the hot night, lay
on a work-table by the wall, and Tom, with
his back to us, was bending over it, motionless.
Next to him stood a motorcycle policeman taking
down names with much sweat and correction
in a little book. At first I couldn’t find
the source of the high, groaning words that
echoed clamorously through the bare garage
— then I saw Wilson standing on the raised
threshold of his office, swaying back and
forth and holding to the doorposts with both
hands. Some man was talking to him in a low
voice and attempting, from time to time, to
lay a hand on his shoulder, but Wilson neither
heard nor saw. His eyes would drop slowly
from the swinging light to the laden table
by the wall, and then jerk back to the light
again, and he gave out incessantly his high,
horrible call:
“Oh, my Ga-od! Oh, my Ga-od! oh, Ga-od!
oh, my Ga-od!”
Presently Tom lifted his head with a jerk
and, after staring around the garage with
glazed eyes, addressed a mumbled incoherent
remark to the policeman.
“M-a-y-,” the policeman was saying, “-o
——”
“No, r-,” corrected the man, “M-a-v-r-o
“Listen to me!” muttered Tom fiercely.
“r” said the policeman, “o ——”
“g ——”
“g ——” He looked up as Tom’s broad
hand fell sharply on his shoulder. “What
you want, fella?”
“What happened? — that’s what I want
to know.”
“Auto hit her. Ins’antly killed.”
“Instantly killed,” repeated Tom, staring.
“She ran out ina road. Son-of-a-bitch didn’t
even stopus car.”
“There was two cars,” said Michaelis,
“one comin’, one goin’, see?”
“Going where?” asked the policeman keenly.
“One goin’ each way. Well, she.”—
his hand rose toward the blankets but stopped
half way and fell to his side ——” she
ran out there an’ the one comin’ from
N’york knock right into her, goin’ thirty
or forty miles an hour.”
“What’s the name of this place here?”
demanded the officer.
“Hasn’t got any name.”
A pale well-dressed negro stepped near.
“It was a yellow car,” he said, “big
yellow car. New.”
“See the accident?” asked the policeman.
“No, but the car passed me down the road,
going faster’n forty. Going fifty, sixty.”
“Come here and let’s have your name. Look
out now. I want to get his name.”
Some words of this conversation must have
reached Wilson, swaying in the office door,
for suddenly a new theme found voice among
his gasping cries:
“You don’t have to tell me what kind of
car it was! I know what kind of car it was!”
Watching Tom, I saw the wad of muscle back
of his shoulder tighten under his coat. He
walked quickly over to Wilson and, standing
in front of him, seized him firmly by the
upper arms.
“You’ve got to pull yourself together,”
he said with soothing gruffness.
Wilson’s eyes fell upon Tom; he started
up on his tiptoes and then would have collapsed
to his knees had not Tom held him upright.
“Listen,” said Tom, shaking him a little.
“I just got here a minute ago, from New
York. I was bringing you that coupe we’ve
been talking about. That yellow car I was
driving this afternoon wasn’t mine — do
you hear? I haven’t seen it all afternoon.”
Only the negro and I were near enough to hear
what he said, but the policeman caught something
in the tone and looked over with truculent
eyes.
“What’s all that?” he demanded.
“I’m a friend of his.” Tom turned his
head but kept his hands firm on Wilson’s
body. “He says he knows the car that did
it . . . it was a yellow car.”
Some dim impulse moved the policeman to look
suspiciously at Tom.
“And what color’s your car?”
“It’s a blue car, a coupe.”
“We’ve come straight from New York,”
I said.
Some one who had been driving a little behind
us confirmed this, and the policeman turned
away.
“Now, if you’ll let me have that name
again correct ——” Picking up Wilson
like a doll, Tom carried him into the office,
set him down in a chair, and came back.
“If somebody’ll come here and sit with
him,” he snapped authoritatively. He watched
while the two men standing closest glanced
at each other and went unwillingly into the
room. Then Tom shut the door on them and came
down the single step, his eyes avoiding the
table. As he passed close to me he whispered:
“Let’s get out.”
Self-consciously, with his authoritative arms
breaking the way, we pushed through the still
gathering crowd, passing a hurried doctor,
case in hand, who had been sent for in wild
hope half an hour ago.
Tom drove slowly until we were beyond the
bend — then his foot came down hard, and
the coupe raced along through the night. In
a little while I heard a low husky sob, and
saw that the tears were overflowing down his
face.
“The God damned coward!” he whimpered.
“He didn’t even stop his car.”
The Buchanans’ house floated suddenly toward
us through the dark rustling trees. Tom stopped
beside the porch and looked up at the second
floor, where two windows bloomed with light
among the vines.
“Daisy’s home,” he said. As we got out
of the car he glanced at me and frowned slightly.
“I ought to have dropped you in West Egg,
Nick. There’s nothing we can do to-night.”
A change had come over him, and he spoke gravely,
and with decision. As we walked across the
moonlight gravel to the porch he disposed
of the situation in a few brisk phrases.
“I’ll telephone for a taxi to take you
home, and while you’re waiting you and Jordan
better go in the kitchen and have them get
you some supper — if you want any.” He
opened the door. “Come in.”
“No, thanks. But I’d be glad if you’d
order me the taxi. I’ll wait outside.”
Jordan put her hand on my arm.
“Won’t you come in, Nick?”
“No, thanks.”
I was feeling a little sick and I wanted to
be alone. But Jordan lingered for a moment
more.
“It’s only half-past nine,” she said.
I’d be damned if I’d go in; I’d had
enough of all of them for one day, and suddenly
that included Jordan too. She must have seen
something of this in my expression, for she
turned abruptly away and ran up the porch
steps into the house. I sat down for a few
minutes with my head in my hands, until I
heard the phone taken up inside and the butler’s
voice calling a taxi. Then I walked slowly
down the drive away from the house, intending
to wait by the gate.
I hadn’t gone twenty yards when I heard
my name and Gatsby stepped from between two
bushes into the path. I must have felt pretty
weird by that time, because I could think
of nothing except the luminosity of his pink
suit under the moon.
“What are you doing?” I inquired.
“Just standing here, old sport.”
Somehow, that seemed a despicable occupation.
For all I knew he was going to rob the house
in a moment; I wouldn’t have been surprised
to see sinister faces, the faces of ‘Wolfsheim’s
people,’ behind him in the dark shrubbery.
“Did you see any trouble on the road?”
he asked after a minute.
“Yes.”
He hesitated.
“Was she killed?”
“Yes.”
“I thought so; I told Daisy I thought so.
It’s better that the shock should all come
at once. She stood it pretty well.”
He spoke as if Daisy’s reaction was the
only thing that mattered.
“I got to West Egg by a side road,” he
went on, “and left the car in my garage.
I don’t think anybody saw us, but of course
I can’t be sure.”
I disliked him so much by this time that I
didn’t find it necessary to tell him he
was wrong.
“Who was the woman?” he inquired.
“Her name was Wilson. Her husband owns the
garage. How the devil did it happen?”
“Well, I tried to swing the wheel ——” He
broke off, and suddenly I guessed at the truth.
“Was Daisy driving?”
“Yes,” he said after a moment, “but
of course I’ll say I was. You see, when
we left New York she was very nervous and
she thought it would steady her to drive — and
this woman rushed out at us just as we were
passing a car coming the other way. It all
happened in a minute, but it seemed to me
that she wanted to speak to us, thought we
were somebody she knew. Well, first Daisy
turned away from the woman toward the other
car, and then she lost her nerve and turned
back. The second my hand reached the wheel
I felt the shock — it must have killed her
instantly.”
“It ripped her open ——”
“Don’t tell me, old sport.” He winced.
“Anyhow — Daisy stepped on it. I tried
to make her stop, but she couldn’t, so I
pulled on the emergency brake. Then she fell
over into my lap and I drove on.
“She’ll be all right to-morrow,” he
said presently. “I’m just going to wait
here and see if he tries to bother her about
that unpleasantness this afternoon. She’s
locked herself into her room, and if he tries
any brutality she’s going to turn the light
out and on again.”
“He won’t touch her,’ I said. “He’s
not thinking about her.”
“I don’t trust him, old sport.”
“How long are you going to wait?”
“All night, if necessary. Anyhow, till they
all go to bed.”
A new point of view occurred to me. Suppose
Tom found out that Daisy had been driving.
He might think he saw a connection in it — he
might think anything. I looked at the house;
there were two or three bright windows down-stairs
and the pink glow from Daisy’s room on the
second floor.
“You wait here,” I said. “I’ll see
if there’s any sign of a commotion.”
I walked back along the border of the lawn,
traversed the gravel softly, and tiptoed up
the veranda steps. The drawing-room curtains
were open, and I saw that the room was empty.
Crossing the porch where we had dined that
June night three months before, I came to
a small rectangle of light which I guessed
was the pantry window. The blind was drawn,
but I found a rift at the sill.
Daisy and Tom were sitting opposite each other
at the kitchen table, with a plate of cold
fried chicken between them, and two bottles
of ale. He was talking intently across the
table at her, and in his earnestness his hand
had fallen upon and covered her own. Once
in a while she looked up at him and nodded
in agreement.
They weren’t happy, and neither of them
had touched the chicken or the ale — and
yet they weren’t unhappy either. There was
an unmistakable air of natural intimacy about
the picture, and anybody would have said that
they were conspiring together.
As I tiptoed from the porch I heard my taxi
feeling its way along the dark road toward
the house. Gatsby was waiting where I had
left him in the drive.
“Is it all quiet up there?” he asked anxiously.
“Yes, it’s all quiet.” I hesitated.
“You’d better come home and get some sleep.”
He shook his head.
“I want to wait here till Daisy goes to
bed. Good night, old sport.”
He put his hands in his coat pockets and turned
back eagerly to his scrutiny of the house,
as though my presence marred the sacredness
of the vigil. So I walked away and left him
standing there in the moonlight — watching
over nothing.